Write an answer to this essay question, drawing on the strategies for planning and answering essay questions that we have explored in recent classes:

"Discuss changing approaches to the Programmatic Music during the period 1820-1910, and how these might relate to changes in musical culture.  

Remember:  
Changes in musical culture = 4 different paragraphs (changing audiences, changing working conditions, changing technologies, the Romantic Movement in the Arts) 
You use example works (earlier and later ones) to evidence these changes. Where can you see the influence of these changes in earlier and later works?
E.g. Where can you see the influence of these kinds of changes in Hebrides Overture? Where can you see the influence of these kinds of changes in the Dante Symphony?  

----

Programmatic music consists of a key theme or idea that is represented within the music. This could be an idea, an emotion or in the case of Vltava, the lifetime of a river and the things that can be seen from it's perspective. 
During 1820-1910, there were a social changes that could have influenced musical cultrue. For example, the middle class wanted democratic ideals portrayed, which meant that composers would be inclined to convey stories of resistance
and protest. There was also the French revolution, which was the result of resistance to oppression - which would of course become a popular program for composers to use. As an example, Tchaikovsky's Romeo and Juliet is a representation
of the two families at war, with both the main characters challenging there ancestors wishes and wars, and choosing to love - and die with - each other. 

There were also technological changes, such as the development of valves, which allowed brass instruments to play chromatically, opening a wide range of possibilities for composers to use. As well as this, the seeminly unrelated invention 
and refinement of trains allowed for faster transport of instruments, people, and music. Concerning social changes, musicians

